flexible joint state message - follow up (#9)
ros-controls/roadmap: design_drafts/flexible_joint_states_msg.md

# Flexible Joint State Messages

## Motivation

Throughout `ros_control`, only the three common fields are used for each joint and actuator.
These are position, velocity and effort.
This is also reflected in [`sensor_msgs/JointState`](http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/JointState.html), cementing this setup in place.
This design is proposing to break with this practice and provide a message that can accommodate reported readings for an arbitrary set of joints or hardware interfaces.
The proposed setup should both allow for reporting values for user-defined interfaces as well as making reporting position, velocity and effort optional.
The rationale behind the latter is that it is currently left entirely to user-policy whether e.g. velocity and effort should be filled with zeroes when only position is reported and how to tell if this is the case.
The flexible joint state message shall encompass a complex  hardware setup, covering a mix of different actuators and sensors.

> A set of mixed-type joints would e.g. be a mobile actuator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A set of mixed-type joints would e.g. be a mobile manipulator.
```

One could think of a diff drive controller only providing velocity values, whereas the manipulator provides the full joint state (`position`, `velocity`, `effort`) for its joints.
In the example given, it would be possible to provide pre-defined fields in a statically defined joint state message, however this brings two problems with it:
1. How can the user indicate that a certain field (e.g. `effort`) is not provided for the joint?
Setting the value to a specific defined value such as `NaN` brings problems, latest when trying to serialize that message.
2. What if neither of the provided fields are reported by the hardware?
One example could be a suction gripper, which may report only the applied pressure or vacuum level, in which case it's again up to the user's creativity to violate one of the existing fields.

## Goal

> With the given motivation, we therefore propose to introduce a flexible way of providing custom values in the joint state message to address the given problems mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the given motivation, we therefore propose to introduce a flexible way of reporting values in the joint state message to address the given problems mentioned above.
```

Further in this text `value-identifier` is used to refer to a type of value reported in joint states, e.g. `position`, `velocity` and `effort`.

The requirements for a flexible joint state message are fulfilled, if it
1. does not enforce defining position, velocity and effort for every joint,

> 1. supports different hardware interface to report additional values on top of position, velocity and effort,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. supports different hardware interface(s) additionally to position, velocity and effort,
```

3. does not enforce defining values for every joint in every value-identifier,
4. provides a realtime-friendly way of use (some assumptions are fair to use),

If the requirements are all fulfilled, the flexible joint state message can replace the currently used `JointStateHandles`.
One can consider the flexible joint state message to represent not only a ROS message, which being used for communication.

> The same message instance can be used internal to ROS control as a storage instance which is used to propagate the robot's state to the loaded controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same message type can be used internally in `ros_control` as a storage instance which is used to propagate the robot's state to the loaded controllers and to convey desired joint/actuator commands to the robot hardware.
```

That is, the hardware interface can fill the joint state message with all information the underlying hardware reports.
This would traditionally be joint states such as `position` and `velocity`, but also provides the flexibility to be extended by non-classical hardware interfaces such as grippers or custom sensors/actuators.
The joint state message would then be passed to each individual controller to read the appropriate information about of the message and perform their calculation.

> The result of each controller can be similarly be stored in the same instance of the joint state message which will be eventually passed back to the hardware interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of each controller can similarly be stored in the same instance of the joint state message which will be eventually passed back to the hardware interface.
```

The hardware interface then can extract the result of the controller's computation from the message and apply their values to the hardware.

> That not only allows to easily combine multiple controllers, but also a dynamic composition of the hardware interface to contain multiple interfaces to various hardware components such as robots, external grippers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That not only allows to easily combine multiple controllers, but also a dynamic composition of the hardware interfaces to contain multiple interfaces to various hardware components such as robots with interchangeable grippers.
```

float64[] effort
```

> The following proposal reflects a map-like (similar to what `std::unordered_map` represents in C++ or a hash table in other languages) datatype where not only three statically chosen value-identifier are attached to a joint name, but can be set dynamically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following proposal reflects a map-like (similar to what `std::unordered_map` represents in C++ or a hash table in other languages) datatype where not only three statically chosen value-identifiers are attached to a joint name, but can be set dynamically.
```

> ### Proposal for a Dynamic Joint State Message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Proposal for a Flexible Joint State Message
```
We can discuss a better name to ship it as but let's keep it consistent for now

```
Header header

string[] interface_name

> InterfaceValue[] interface_value

Reviewer: We should iterate a bit on these names, they are way too general for my taste.
Please feel free to resolve this once read, don't want to hold up the PR.

```
Header header

interface_name = ['wheel_left', 'wheel_right', 'joint_1', 'joint_2', …, 'joint_N', 'gripper_1']
InterfaceValue = [wheel_left_iv, wheel_right_iv, joint_1_iv, joint_2_iv, …, joint_n_iv, gripper_1_iv]
```
where the `InterfaceValue` messages can be composed individually per `InterfaceName`.
The name is similar to the already existing joint state message coming from the URDF.

The `InterfaceValue` for the left wheel `wheel_left_iv` could be composed as such, reporting only its velocity:
```
value_identifier = ['velocity']
value = [1.5]
```

The `InterfaceValue` for the first joint `joint_1_iv` reports a more complete interface:
```
value_identifier = ['position', 'velocity', 'effort']
value = [1.1, 2.2, 3.3]
```

Additionally, the `InterfaceValue` for the gripper can be completely custom:
```
value_identifier = ['vaccuum_level', 'voltage']
value = [4.4, 5.5]
```

That allows a relatively straight forward lookup of dynamically attached values per interface name.
Each individual field is thus indexable by a tuple of `interface_name` and `value_identifier`.

## Issues Considered

### Name Lookup

> *Value Identifier Convention*

Reviewer: We should enforce this through the URDF and transmission parsers. Design doc coming up. later this week.
